Good morning.
Welcome to Cocoa: What's New.
Today we're going to tell you
what we did to Cocoa since the
last time we were together,
about a year ago.
The talk is divided into two parts.
First, we're going to talk about
changes in the Foundation kit,
followed by changes in
the Application kit.
Note that in Foundation,
we did not have too many
public API changes in 10.1,
so most of the changes here
are actually new to Jaguar.
To highlight here,
NSNet services are the new
APIs to support Rendezvous,
and we have a new keyed archiving
mechanism that I want to tell you about.
Then we're going to talk
about the AppKit changes,
first quickly covering the
changes we introduced in 10.1,
followed by the changes
we've introduced in Jaguar.
Now note that there's
a lot of topics here,
and we're going to be
jumping from topic to topic,
so hopefully it's not
too disorienting for you.
So at this point,
I'd like to invite Chris Parker on
stage to talk about some
of the Foundation changes.
My name is Chris Parker.
I'm a foundation engineer.
I've been working a little
bit on some of these things.
First off, managed preferences.
We've made some changes to
NS File Manager since 10.1 and
brought some new stuff in for Jaguar.
There have been some updates
to NSURL Handle and the new
Rendezvous APIs in Foundation.
So starting off, it's over here.
Managed preferences.
Your applications may be operating
in an environment where the
user doesn't have the ability
to change certain preferences.
A lab administrator in a school or
a parent in a single machine may set
some preferences for a user to use,
and they shouldn't be
able to change those.
So what we do is we put a
forced preferences domain at the
beginning of the search path,
and keys that appear in
that domain always win out.
So users shouldn't be
able to set these things.
Applications should disable their
controls where the user can't
change a preference key to give
them a better user experience.
You don't want them hammering on that
button if they can't change the value.
So what we've done is forced preferences.
Managed preferences.
Your applications may be operating
in an environment where the
user doesn't have the ability
to change certain preferences.
They should be able to change those.
So what we've done is forced preferences.
Your applications may be operating
in an environment where the
user doesn't have the ability
to change certain preferences.
You don't want them hammering on that
button if they can't change the value.
What we've done is forced
values will always be returned
when you use object for key.
So if the administrator has placed a
value in that forced preferences domain,
you'll always get it when you
ask for it with object for key.
We've also provided a couple of routines
for you to be able to pick out whether
or not those objects are forced.
That's object is forced for key and
object is forced for key and domain.
And these will return true if there's
been a value forced for that key.
Some changes for NS File Manager.
As of 10/1,
we started doing some resource
fork and catalog info preservation
when you do moves and copies.
We're trying to expand
on that a little bit.
We're also putting in support for
the BSD file flags for the file
immutable and file append only bits.
We've got some information
there for file creation date,
the HFS creator and type codes,
as well as the account information
for the owner and owner group IDs.
We're also supplying an API to do
some intermediate directory creation.
You'll be able to create a whole
series of directories at once rather
than having to iterate through a path.
There have been some
updates to NSURL handle.
We've added some FTP support.
A lot of bugs got shaken out over the
course of the last several months.
We now have asynchronous hostname lookup,
so you're not going to block
when you try and open up this
thing to look for a hostname.
There's going to be some
tighter integration with system
configuration planned out,
and although it's not here,
by the time Jaguar ships,
I've been told this is going to
also support FTP proxy support.
This NSNet Services stuff is our
implementation in the foundation
level of the Rendezvous API.
This exposes some of the lower level
features that have been put into
Core Foundation and into the OS.
If you do a top on a Jaguar machine,
you'll probably see a little
thing called MDNS responder,
and that's part of what's doing
the work for Rendezvous there.
This exposes all of that
stuff at the foundation level.
This allows us to do dynamic
discovery of TCP/IP services.
You don't need any prior knowledge of the
address of the thing you're looking for,
the host name, anything like that.
You're just going to be able to
find it right on the network.
You advertise services,
and then once you want to
look for those services,
you're going to discover them,
and then discovered services,
once you find them,
you resolve them to be able to
actually make the connection.
So when you start publishing a service,
you're going to have to pick a domain.
Right now that's local.arpa,
and that's basically your local subnet.
Okay, services that you offer are
also going to have a name,
a type, and a port.
And you'll also create a delegate
object which is going to listen
for events that the NSNet services
objects will tell you about.
Okay, so when you first create this,
you're going to alloc one up
and then init it with a domain,
a type, the name, and the port.
The type string is a little bit of magic,
but that's based on the services
that are in Etsy services.
You'll set the delegate to some other
object and then just tell it to publish.
And that'll start advertising itself
on the network with that information.
What the user will wind up seeing
is something like Nifty Demo Server.
And that's about the only
thing they need to worry about.
The delegate implements methods
like NetServiceWillPublish
that's going to say,
"Yes, I'm about to go out and make this
service available on the network."
And NetServiceDidNotPublish will
be where you catch an error.
The network wasn't ready,
there's been a name collision,
that kind of thing.
When you want to go out
and look for these things,
you need an NSNetServiceBrowser object.
Since domains and services are dynamic,
each of these things can
come and go off the network.
So this is going to tell you about
all the different events that
happen when this domain disappears
or when a service shuts down.
And again, you're going to use a
delegate to get these events.
So when you want to discover domains,
I need to find what domains
are available to browse.
You just do a standard alloc
init sequence and then again,
set a delegate and then just
tell it to search for all the
domains that are available.
Tell me everything that's out there.
You'll get "Did find domain"
messages on your delegate.
That's NetService Browser.
"Did find domain more coming." The "more
coming" part is to let you know that
if there is something else coming up,
you're going to want to hold
off on any expensive UI updates.
"Did remove domain" says, "Oh,
it went away.
I should remove it from my list."
Once you've found domains,
you're going to want to find
services within that domain.
So you may want to use another object,
set it up, set the delegate,
and then just tell it to search for
services of type in a given domain.
Just like there's did find
domain and did remove domain,
there's did find service
and did remove service.
And these will tell you what happened.
Once you get it, for instance,
in your did find service
more coming method,
you'll want to hang on to it.
You're going to get one of these
NSNet services when the event comes in.
You're going to want to hang on to it,
and then you're going
to want to resolve it.
And this will allow you to get
all the information you need to be
able to hand it off to something
that will allow you to make the
connection to that other machine.
This API is asynchronous,
so you do have to have a run loop
running when you're going to use it.
The NetService objects
that you create to resolve,
okay, you can't use to publish.
So anything you get from
a NetService browser,
you can't publish it
immediately with that.
Those are things that are
happening on other machines.
The only things you can publish
are the things that you're going to
make available on your own computer.
And NSNet Service browser objects can
only go after one thing at a time.
So you can't tell a
browser object to say,
"Go search for domains," and then
immediately tell it to go search
for services within that domain.
You can either create another one or
you can tell the first one to stop
and then start a new kind of search.
There have been a bunch of
other foundation changes,
but Chris Kane is going
to tell you about those.
So I'm going to wrap up the
Foundation changes here before we
bring Ali back to talk about AppKit.
I'm going to talk a little bit
about the new archiving mechanism
that we've added to Jaguar.
Some of the new property list
format and new APIs to deal with
property lists in Foundation.
How you do some version checking so
that you can safely use these new APIs.
And a few other miscellaneous topics.
So first, let's talk about NSArchiver.
NSArchiver has always had a
number of issues or limitations.
To unarchive an object,
you have to know what order and what
state was archived in the archive for
that object at some point in the past.
And all the values must be unarchived in
the same order that they were archived.
You also cannot skip values.
For example,
you cannot choose to not unarchive
some state that was previously
unarchived if you don't want it anymore,
for example.
You also cannot probe the archive to see,
well, was this piece of state
saved in the past?
And if so, unarchive it.
You would want to do that, for example,
if you had many different
versions of a class.
You would want to do that, for example,
if you had many different
versions of a class.
In the past,
we wanted to see what version
or what state had been saved.
And for some reason, you didn't know.
All of this,
these three limitations where
you must unarchive values in the
same order that you archive them,
you must unarchive all the values,
and you cannot ask to unarchive
values which weren't actually saved,
make both forwards and
backwards compatibility,
dealing with archives that are old or
archives that are new on older systems,
make both of those very cumbersome.
So we've introduced keyed archiving.
This isn't a new idea
with us by any means.
We've introduced keyed archiving
mechanism into Cocoa for Jaguar.
This allows you to unarchive
values in any order.
You can choose to unarchive only the
values that you want in that particular
version of the class and ignore
values which were previously saved,
if you wish.
And you can test the archive.
You can ask for values which
may not be in the archive.
You ask by name.
And if the value that you're asking for,
for example,
you want to get some flags or some
other state out of the archive,
is not there,
the new mechanism will return you some
default value appropriate to the type.
For example, if you try to unarchive an
object and it's not there,
we will return nil.
So,
eliminating those three main limitations,
and I'm just talking about those three,
there are other...
and Chris Kuhn.
The key to archiving is simplifying
backwards and forwards compatibility.
We still do type checking, however,
which is that if you encode an object,
you must, say, decode an object.
Or if you encode an int,
you must decode an int.
You cannot decode it later as a float,
for example.
We still enforce type checking,
and that's primarily to help you help us.
Because we're also customers of this API.
Find errors in the encoding
and decoding code in classes.
We do allow some simple conversions.
For example, you can encode a float
and decode it as a double,
or vice versa.
You can encode a 64-bit int
and decode it as a 32-bit int,
and as long as it fits in 32 bits,
you're okay.
Otherwise, we will raise an exception.
So what does the new API look like?
Well, very straightforward.
NSKeyedArchiver and NSKeyedUnarchiver
are two new classes.
These behave very much like the
NSArchiver and NSUnarchiver classes that
you are probably already familiar with.
The NSCoding protocol has not changed.
It remains the same.
You still use encodeWithCoder
and the initWithCoder methods.
The new coder methods which take
string keys to identify the values,
some of them are given here as examples,
like decode bool for key.
Not all the Coder subclasses
are going to do keyed archiving.
For example, we don't own,
Apple doesn't provide all the subclasses
of NSCoder that are out there.
Obviously you guys have written
some NSCoder subclasses and
we can't obviously force your
classes now to do keyed archiving.
So, there's a way now in NSCoder to
test to see if a Coder does the new
keyed coding mechanism and that's
the allowed keys coding method.
Currently in Foundation,
in the Jaguar drop seed
that you have gotten,
only keyed archiver and NSKeed
unarchiver do keyed coding.
In the future,
we'll be able to do keyed archiving.
So, there's a way now in NSCoder to
test to see if a Coder does the new
keyed coding mechanism and that's
the allowed keys coding method.
Currently in Foundation,
in the Jaguar drop seed
that you have gotten,
only keyed archiver and NSKeed
unarchiver do keyed coding.
In the future, we're going to have,
say for example, the NSPortCoder set of
classes do keyed coding,
but they don't in that CD you have.
for Jaguar right now.
Let's run through a quick example.
In this code,
I'm gonna archive an object.
Archive an integer, some flags,
and archive another object.
That's pretty straightforward.
The class, in its initWithCoder,
in this case,
is going to choose to unarchive
the second object first,
and I don't know why I would do this.
Obviously you can unarchive things in
the same order that you archive them,
just as you always have.
But if you want to, you can, for example,
if you're going to make a decision
based on one piece or two pieces
of the state in an archive,
you could request those first
and then decide what different
code path you're going to follow.
Here in the fifth line of code,
Code is trying to unarchive
a value for the key shape,
which wasn't previously archived.
And what's going to happen
is that decode_int for key
is going to return zero,
and the shape instance variable
is going to have the value zero.
Finally, I'm going to show an error.
Here,
we're going to decode float for key,
the flags.
Obviously, as I said before,
we still do type checking.
So,
the float value for flags doesn't exist,
and we're going to throw an exception.
That's because we encoded the
flags as an int previously.
So, some other notes on the
keyed archiving mechanism,
just in passing.
Now you can store as
many values as you like,
with string names, obviously,
at the top level of the
archive as you wish.
Generally in the past, with an archive,
you did encode root object
and encoded one object,
typically encoded one
object at the top level.
Now I think it will become much
more common for you to save
potentially many different objects,
all named, at the top level.
And of course you can unarchive
them in any order that you wish,
or you can choose not to unarchive all of
them if you're later reading an archive.
You should use a unique prefix on
the key names for encoded state.
And Cocoa is going to use the prefix NS,
obviously.
And this is to avoid colliding with
any keys that your superclasses
may have already chosen or
may choose in the future,
which they may not be using right now.
You can also use the
non-keyed coding mechanisms.
Obviously the NSCoder still implements
methods like encode value of obc type at,
and those are inherited by
the new NSKeyedArchiver and
NSKeyedUnarchiver classes.
We don't recommend this,
and what will happen is
that the information will
be stored in the archive,
but for those cases where you
still use the old methods,
you are still subject
to the old restrictions.
That is, for those old bits of state,
you still have to unarchive
them in the same order,
you still have to read all of them,
and you still have to not try to read
values which you didn't previously save.
So what is the output of a keyed archive?
What does a keyed archive look like?
Well, today,
keyed archives come in two flavors.
Both of them property lists.
Either an XML property
list of the type found in,
say, 10.1,
or a new binary format property list that
I'll be talking about in a little while.
Now, the output of an archiver,
a keyed archiver,
won't always be a property list.
These are just the two formats
that we've introduced so far,
and we may introduce more
formats in the future.
IB allows you to save a Nib document in
the Jaguar snapshot that you've gotten.
If you look in the preferences panel,
it talks about, with a radio button,
a pre-10.2 format,
a 10.2 and later format,
and both formats.
What this allows you to do is save a
Nib file with either NSArchiver output,
NSKeedArchiver output, or both.
If you save a Nib file, for example,
in both, you can take that Nib and
then read it back on 10.1,
as long as you haven't used any
of the new features in 10.2,
new widgets or what have you.
Of course, this is true into the future.
This is true into the future.
It's not just true of the
10.1 to 10.2 transients,
but it will always be true that as
long as you don't use any new features
and you're using old archiving,
you have to make sure you don't
take that back to an older
system if you use new features.
So there's a lot more information
in the foundation release notes.
I wrote like 13 pages of
release notes on how to do the
conversion of existing classes.
They're init with coders
and encode with coders,
have to be modified to take
advantage of keyed coding.
And how to plan for and do
compatibility within the classes.
Planning, with keyed archiving,
planning becomes almost as important
and potentially even more important than
with the old NS archiver where really
you had to deal with everything in the
init with coder on the reading side.
Now with keyed archiving you
can do more on the encoding
side to plan for the future.
I mentioned this new binary
property list format.
We've introduced this because it's
more compact representation of
a property list and it's faster.
Especially for big property lists,
it can be quite a bit faster
to read the binary format.
There's a lot less information,
for example,
that has to come off the disk.
The binary format also opens up
the possibility for us to add some
additional efficiency capabilities and
these will probably come after Jaguar.
They will probably not come
in Jaguar at this point.
Another note, just in passing,
we've bumped the version string that
you find in an XML property list to 1.0.
It used to be 0.9.
There have been no changes
in the property list format.
We've simply incremented the
version to get it at 1.0.
And we're also calling
this new binary format 1.0.
This becomes interesting because we now
have APIs where you can choose which
format you save right out to the disk.
You can choose 1.0, 2.0,
whatever there will be in the future.
As I was saying,
we've added a new class and it's
property list serialization and
it has these methods to allow you
to choose to write an archive,
a property list in
whichever format you choose.
Also read,
and on the read side it will tell
you what format the file was so
that you can preserve whichever
format the file started in.
If you're going to read in a file,
make some changes, write it back out.
We've deprecated an
serializer and a deserializer.
and these have also never
supported the new property list
types that we added in Mac OS X,
new relative to OpenSTEPP.
The NSBoolean,
or the Boolean number and date objects,
as far as allowing them
to be property lists.
So let me take a break here at this
point and talk about how do you
use these new APIs and features
that we've been talking about.
Such that your new binary in
10.2 could also run on 10.1.
Well, the first thing to do is always use
Objective-C runtime checks if you can.
If it's possible with whatever
the particular API is,
use runtime checks
when they're available.
So check for classes
with NSClass from string,
Check for methods with
response to selector.
If you must,
you can go to the globals that
AppKit and Foundation export and
its Foundation version number
and its AppKit version number.
What you do with those is that we
have recorded the historical values
like the 10.1 version of Foundation in
Foundation API in one of the headers such
as NS Foundation version number 10.1.
You can compare against that.
You can compare using the global
to see if the current version is
larger than the historical version
to find out if you're running on a
version which is newer than 10.1.
Sometimes the release notes also mention
a particular version number and provide
a constant for which you can test to see,
okay, am I running, for example,
on an app kit which has, for example,
I don't want to give away any of
Ali's features like directional tabs.
I will.
So if you want to avoid using new API,
if you don't want to risk it,
because you want your app definitely
to be able to run in 10.1,
there's this new header
called availabilitymacros.h.
It's part of the system,
not part of Cocoa, per se.
And it simply defines some constants
that can be used to protect,
you know, if-def API and headers,
protect them against accidental damage.
So you can use this as a declaration
if you're compiling your project,
for example, so that you're only
getting 10.1 declarations.
A couple of tips for OBC programmers
are that you should not subclass
new classes if you want them
to run on an older system.
That's just not going to work
because the new class obviously
won't be on the older system.
And you should not reference
new global variables.
Those are the two most
common problems we see.
Obviously, people do fail to check for
responding to a selector,
for example, before messaging an object.
But those are problems that
can easily be solved by calling
something like response to selector.
These other problems,
like subclassing a new class,
are much harder to discover.
So Foundation now supports Unicode 3.2.
This includes a much larger
range of Unicode characters.
What is it?
17 times larger range than
the old 0 to 65,536 range.
535, I should say.
The string model is based
on 16-bit characters,
and so what an NSString will do to
represent these higher Unicode characters
is use Unicode 3.2 surrogate pairs.
Now, code which is examining a string
should always have been using
the range of composed character
sequence at index method to
iterate over the string or examine
individual radians that you've got.
So, this is a very important
thing to remember.
And this is still true.
Now, in Jaguar,
this method is going to return ranges
for surrogate pairs that it finds.
So there's some new NSString API as well.
Some methods to trim and pad the
characters off the ends of strings,
and these are commonly used.
There's some new methods to pre-compose
and decompose strings per algorithms
defined in the Unicode 3.2 spec.
And there's a new method I'm going to
mention in passing on NSMutableString to
efficiently replace all the occurrences
of a string inside of another string,
and that's the method that
I've listed here at the bottom.
I'm not going to read it.
Now, in 10.2,
during the development of 10.2,
we found that a number of places
in NSString were not checking as
strictly as they might for various
out-of-bounds values and null values.
And so the type checking in
10.2 is made much more strict
on parameter errors like that.
And these are programming errors.
You need to fix them.
For 10.1 apps,
apps compiled and linked on 10.1,
we maintain compatibility.
However, compatibility was often a crash.
And so, compatibility is not
necessarily always a good thing.
Now you'll get an exception
for these types of errors.
UTF-8 conversions also, for example,
are now less forgiving than they were
about invalid UTF-8 sequences in 10.1.
So finally I'm going to wrap
up by mentioning an often used,
often needed rather, method,
which is we've added a new
method on NSObject called
performSelectorOnMainThread with
argument waitUntilDoneModes.
That's the full one.
There's another convenience.
Often with the app kit,
you have to get some work done.
There's a thread in the background,
and it wants to do some work.
And it needs to get that work
done by the main thread due to,
well, whatever reason.
Now, to do this in the past,
we've often recommended DIO.
You set up a DIO connection
on the main thread,
and your background thread looks it up,
sends messages via DIO between
one thread and another.
Well, this has never been a really
appealing workaround solution for us,
but it's the best we could recommend.
The new method,
performSelectorOnMainThread,
is much cheaper than setting
up a big DO subsystem.
You don't have to marshal
arguments back and forth.
And I had one person
who had just gone in,
ripped out, said, "Oh,
I wish I'd had this when I first wrote
the code." They ripped out 100 lines of
their code and called this one function.
And they said,
"This is the best method ever."
We do maintain ordering for a
particular background thread,
you know, sending to the main thread,
or the main thread can
execute this method as well.
We do maintain the order
of those invocations,
but obviously, there's no ordering
guaranteed amongst threads,
or amongst a background thread and the
main thread performing this method.
Now let me bring Ali Ozer back out
to talk about the APCIT changes
that occurred in 10.1 and 10.2.
Ali?
Just to highlight this method again,
if you are doing AppKit programming
and you're using multiple threads,
this method is your friend.
It's as useful as the performAfterDelay
method that some of you might be using.
That one lets you perform
tomorrow what you can do today.
The other one allows you to
have somebody else perform
what you can perform instead.
So these are both very useful methods.
Okay, so we're going to first talk a
little bit about 10.1 AppKit changes.
Just the highlights because many of you
are already probably familiar with these.
And then we're going to
dive into Jaguar changes.
One of the biggest areas of
change in 10.1 was NSDocument.
We added the ability to track documents
on file systems that support it,
meaning if your document is open in
an NSDocument-based app and the user
renames the volume or renames the
folder that encloses the document,
moves the document, and so on,
your app will notice this
immediately and take action.
And that is good
Macintosh user experience.
It also preserves attributes
and aliases to documents.
You move the document to a
new location on your desktop,
you re-save it again,
the new location is maintained.
And also aliases to that
document will also be maintained.
These are all natural
things that should work,
and with NSDocument-based
apps it does work.
NSDocument in 10.1 also
supports hidden extensions,
which I will actually talk in a
little detail about because this is
an important feature we introduced.
Okay, so we're going to talk about 10.1.
As most of you know,
file extensions are a good
idea for compatibility with
other systems and the web.
I think most of you agree with that.
Well, we also know that they
confuse some users,
scare others,
and some users are just plain
disgusted by file extensions.
And that's true too,
because they get in the way of
naming their files the way they want.
So, what we did in 10.1 is to introduce
this concept of hidden file extensions.
And this isn't just hiding the
file extension across all files.
This is hide the file
extension on a per-file basis.
So, it's a pretty powerful feature.
The extension is still in the name.
It's not displayed.
If the user wants to save their
image as WWDCphoto and hits return,
that is the name that they see in Finder,
in the Save panel,
in their window title bar.
However, in the file system,
the file is called WWDCphoto.jpg.
So let me just talk a little bit
about what it takes to take advantage
of this feature in your application.
When you put up a save panel,
you need to call this method
saying that you are willing to
deal with hidden extensions.
And this caused the save panel to get a
little more UI and look for this case.
And then when the save
panel is dismissed,
you ask, is the extension hidden?
This basically indicates whether the
user wanted the extension hidden or not.
And based on this,
you will hide the extension.
Now note that the file name
the save panel returns will
still have the extension.
It will always be called WWDCphoto.jpg,
and this will tell you whether
you should hide the extension.
If the extension should be hidden,
you would use NSFileManager
and this new attribute,
NSFileExtensionHidden,
on the second line there,
to set its value to yes.
And you might already have
code like this in your app to
set attributes on your files.
Here is yet one more attribute
you would use this for.
And finally,
when dealing with hidden extensions,
if you do want to show
the name of a file,
you should be using this
file manager method,
displayNameAtPath,
which returns to you the user-visible,
the human-readable name of the file.
So in this case,
it will not have the .jpg if
the file extension was hidden.
And the savePanel, finder,
windowTitleBars,
etc., those already call this method,
obviously, so you don't have to
worry about those cases.
The good thing is NSDocument
does all this for you.
So if you're not an NSDocument-based app,
for instance, TextEdit,
it does this by hand,
but if you're NSDocument-based,
all of this happens for you.
There are a few override
points or methods you can call
to customize this behavior,
like find out if the user did want
the hidden extension and so on,
but in general,
you don't have to worry about it.
So NSDocument is your friend.
In TextSystem in 10.1,
we added support for filter services
and we taught it how to speak.
Filter services,
if you're familiar with NSImages'
support of filter services,
work the same way.
Methods in the TextSystem
that open files generically,
meaning just by file path or by URL,
now know how to open files that
can be opened via a filter service.
What I mean by here is if the user
has a filter service that converts
Word documents or RightNow documents,
say, to RTF,
the TextSystem can now open them after
running them through the filter service.
And just like in S-Image,
there are methods to tell
you what the native types
supported by the text system are,
so RTF, etc., and what the filter
service converted types are,
so you can make decisions based
on the return values here.
And also note that if you open
a file and it was converted,
you get this key converted
in the document's attributes
dictionary with a value of true,
indicating that the file was converted.
So you can indicate to the
user that this file was loaded
as a result of conversion.
The text system now knows how to speak.
This one is fairly straightforward.
It's a very high-level API that
is connected to responder methods.
The startSpeaking,
stopSpeaking menu items will drive these,
and if you actually implement
these on your responder classes,
the menu items will also
apply to your classes as well.
In between 10.0 and 10.1,
one of the things we did to the system
was a lot of performance improvements.
And one area where performance was
improved was live resizing of windows.
And one way to achieve this is via
these APIs that we publicized in 10.1.
You can find out when a view
starts a live resize or when the
window starts a live resize or
when the window ends live resizing.
You'll get these method calls once,
at the beginning and at the end.
And even if your view is
inserted and removed from the
view hierarchy repeatedly,
like the columns of a browser,
you'll still only get these methods once.
These methods allow you to
set up some state and tear
down that state at the end.
For example,
if your view does some very complicated
drawing that takes some time,
during live resize,
you might want to take a shortcut.
You might want to cache
parts of the view.
If you're a map program,
you might want to not display
every little village in the
map and just draw less things.
If you use these methods at the end,
you do want your view to be redrawn.
You just say set needs display, yes,
and the view will be redrawn
once the view is redrawn.
Once the live resize is over.
There's also additional
convenience method in live resize,
which is fairly easy.
You can just call it from your draw
rect to see if you're in live resize.
If you are, do less work,
and the live resize will
be smoother for the user.
This also applies to split view resizing
and any other live resizing situations.
This application in 10.1 has the ability
to set the contents of a doc menu.
This is fairly straightforward.
You can provide a menu in a Nib and
provide the name of that Nib file.
That's fairly static.
Or you can provide the
menu via a delegate method,
which is of course more dynamic.
Many of you have reported this bug
where the sender in these cases was the
application object and not the menu item.
This has been fixed in Jaguar.
We also have doc notifications.
Some of you might have noticed
those bouncing doc icons and
wondered where they're coming from.
There are two APIs that let you start
a notification and end a notification.
These are automatic for modal
panels in an active app.
What happens is if your
app is in the background,
not active, and it puts up a modal panel,
instead of that modal panel
coming right to the front,
right in your face,
interrupting your typing,
the doc icon automatically
starts bouncing.
You don't have to do anything
for modal panels in this case.
Note that you can set the
settings for the doc menu.
The only thing I'll add in Jaguar is in
case this bouncing wasn't enough for you,
this will also cause some speaking
and other things to happen.
You'll see it.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, I didn't skip anything.
No.
Okay, so now I'm going to go to
the Jaguar AppKit changes,
which is the bulk of the
rest of the talk here.
Text system.
We have more changes in the text system.
Now as you saw in Scott's talk yesterday,
it comes with more
built-in spelling checkers.
And there's an interesting
little story here,
spelling checking disasters.
That colorful over there was
supposed to be spelled the proper
way for people coming from England.
But PowerPoint spell checker at the
last minute seems to have fixed it,
so here I am up there with
my point somewhat ruined.
Anyway, if you're using the
British English spell checker,
which is distinct from the
American spell checker,
you would get colorful to
be recognized with a U.
And there's also
multilingual spell checker,
which does recognize many
languages at once if you're
doing a lot of multilingual work.
So that's fairly obvious.
We finally added support for
right centered and decimal tabs.
And we've also added support
for bidirectional text.
The tab stops is fairly straightforward.
For many years now,
you might have seen these little
widgets in the ruler of TextCited
and other Cocoa applications,
and they were dimmed.
Well, now they aren't, so that's that.
And the enum values were there before,
so there's no new API.
Bi-directional text,
as some of you are probably aware,
bi-directional text is needed
for proper support of Hebrew,
Arabic, and some other scripts.
It's not just right-to-left text,
it's actually the ability to put the
English and Japanese normal left-to-right
scripts with these other scripts going
in the same line at the same time,
which actually has a lot
of complicated rules.
Selections can now be disjoint.
When you make a selection,
you'll see two or three boxes and so on.
So it's actually fairly
complex functionality in there.
One thing we've said with regards to this
feature before is that the tech system
is ready for this feature API-wise,
and we will not add any new APIs.
It turns out that was true.
We did not really add any new APIs.
The only API we added is
some highly obscure thing,
which most of you won't need.
It's basically a new glyph
attribute indicating the
bi-directional text levels.
We did also add a new
typesetter subclass,
because we want to keep the old
typesetter there for those of you
who might have subclassed it or who
might have a need to use that exact
typesetter with its typesetting rules.
But the new typesetter subclass
will be the default typesetter,
so by default most apps will just get
this functionality out of the box.
Now note that in the Jaguar CD you got,
the new typesetter subclass
is not enabled by default.
Localized File System View,
you probably saw this in
Scott Forstall's talk yesterday.
Here we show the file system to you
in localized for the user's language.
We're not localizing the file system.
The file system names, the folders, etc.
are not renamed.
Instead, we just display localized
names for different entities,
which allows different users on the
same machine to see the file system
entities in their own language.
Now some of you might be saying,
you're recycling slides, aren't you?
Because this is the slide I just
showed 15 slides ago where I said,
use this if you want to get
proper hidden extension behavior.
Well, it turns out in Jaguar you can
use this if you want to get proper
localized file system view behavior.
This method now not only
does hidden extensions,
it will also localize as well.
Now some of you might be wondering,
oh great, now how do I localize my app
name so it appears localized?
The process is actually
pretty straightforward.
It's what you already do, really,
for the most part.
You add CFBundle.name to your Info.plist.
PV already puts one there for you.
It needs to be the same
as bundle's actual name.
So if your bundle is called textedit.app,
your CFBundle.name is textedit.
That's because if the
username is textedit.old or
some simple word processor,
at that point it's no longer localized
because the name has been changed.
Then you add this key
ls.has.localized.displayname
to your Info.plist.
This is probably the only
special thing you need to do.
This is for performance reasons.
We decided we needed
to have a separate key.
Then you would have a CFBundle.name
in your Info.plist.strings,
which you might already have added.
So CFBundle.name in
your Info.plist.strings
provides localized names.
This other key tells the system
that there is a localized name.
Note that in addition to
localizing your app name,
you can localize your bundles
with the same process.
You can localize
arbitrary folders as well.
This will be documented in
the release notes in Jaguar.
So tab views.
Chris already spilled
the beans on this one.
But anyway, so there's directional tabs.
Before we only had the northward,
the upward facing tabs.
Actually that's not really true.
We also had the rather shy
and elusive tabless tab view,
which actually is more useful
than some people think.
But anyway,
the one in the middle was also there,
although most people
probably didn't use it.
Now we have the left, right,
and the bottom tab views as well.
The interesting thing here
is that there's no new APIs.
Again, all the API was there.
But the methods that you might
override or call to draw the
labels do the right thing.
In that, they transform the coordinate
system for you and then call you.
So if you do drawing,
if you write some text,
they will appear in the
orientation shown here.
So you don't have to worry about it.
If you want to do something special,
then you might have to do other
coordinate system transforms yourself.
NSImage now,
there are a lot of bug fixes and
performance enhancements in NSImage.
These are the top three.
It now supports animated images.
This is a support at very
low level where NSImage reps
created from animated images,
for instance animated GIF files,
have these three properties which lets
you find out what the frame count is,
what the duration is,
and also set what the current frame is.
Now, it's possible, of course,
using this API,
it's possible to do all sorts
of animated image stuff.
We are looking at getting feature into
NSImageView and NSText for Jaguar.
Currently, the support is in NSImageRep.
Progressive image loading allows you
to load an image in the background
and display it to the user in pieces
as the image becomes available.
There are four delegate methods.
All you have to do is implement
the last one for the simplest
approach here while you are here
when the image is finally loaded.
But, for instance,
you can also override the second
method to find out when the header
of the image has been loaded so you
know how big it is and you can start
displaying a placeholder if you want.
You can also override the
third one to find out as the
image chunks are coming in.
There is also a more sophisticated
API down in ImageRep for if you
are the one getting the data and
you want to pass it to NSImage,
you can also use that API.
And finally, we are making caching
policy more explicit.
Here, by caching,
I mean NSImage's ability to put bitmaps,
PDFs, etc.
in off-screen windows.
Clearly, if all the images are cached
in off-screen windows,
they're faster,
but also there's more memory used.
So, NSImage does make the decision
by itself on a per-image basis,
but if you're dealing
with hundreds of images,
you might find that it's better for your
app's purposes to set the policy on a
per-image basis one way or the other.
This API will do that.
There's a little stylized spinning
arrow on the side for you,
but basically this is a control
that was missing in Cocoa.
We've added this as a variant
of progress indicator class.
It's because this is pretty
much the same thing as an
indeterminate progress indicator.
You can set the style by default,
you get the bar,
but if you set the style you
can get the spinning one.
There's also more API in
progress indicator.
You can now size to fit it.
You can create a spinning arrow
that's as big as your screen,
but if you size to fit it will give
you the natural recommended size.
You can also set whether the
spinning arrows or the bar is
displayed when it's stopped.
Typically the spinning arrows are
not displayed when it's stopped,
for instance, so this controls that.
NS Toolbar now has a small icon mode.
We will automatically resize
your images for you if you want,
or you can provide small images
if you really want to control
every pixel in that toolbar.
The API is fairly straightforward.
It's much like the other toolbar APIs.
One thing that people have been
asking in NS Workspace is to get
more information about launched
applications and running applications.
This is something that you guys
had to go to the process manager
in Carbon for on occasion.
Now what we've done is the notifications
for launching apps now include in
the user info dictionary these keys:
the path of the application, the PID,
and so on.
So you can find out more
about launched applications.
In addition,
you can ask what are the launched
applications so far and what's
the current active application.
These return either an array
of dictionaries or a dictionary
which contain the keys
I showed on the previous slide.
Yesterday you saw the textured,
the metal background window.
So that's shown here at the end there.
Textured background window mask.
We call it textured just in
case it changes from metal.
But anyway, so this
This is now available to you either
through IB or through API to use.
Now one warning about this,
every window and every app
on the system is metal.
The system is going to look rather heavy.
The idea here is you would want to use
this either in one window apps like
Calculator or apps where the window
represents an interface to the device.
iTunes, iPhoto, those are good examples.
You should not use this style
of window for your panels,
your auxiliary windows, your sheets,
and so on.
Those still use the
favorite corduroy pattern.
Now the one I didn't talk about,
non-activating panel mask.
If your app wants to put up
a panel that gets user input,
like keyboard entry,
but you don't want your
app to become active,
this is the style of
panel you want to use.
It's useful on certain occasions.
It's certainly used by the system.
In addition to the
textured background stuff,
we've also added slightly finer control.
You can now make windows
movable by window background.
This is appropriate, clearly,
for textured windows
which have no title bar,
but also for other windows where
there's no obvious title bar,
like a clock and so on.
This will make the window
move from anywhere.
In addition,
you can set the background color of
a window to an arbitrary color or,
in fact, even a texture, as you know,
because NS colors can represent textures,
patterns.
And again, don't use this everywhere,
but there are cases where it's handy.
Yesterday in Scott's talk,
you heard about Carbon/CoCoa integration.
So the goal here is,
for you Cocoa developers,
the goal here is for you to
allow writing plug-ins in Cocoa,
say, for existing Carbon applications.
And you saw that Photoshop demo where
a Cocoa plug-in worked in Photoshop.
A few weeks ago, we did not think that
would be possible at all,
but it turns out it was.
And also,
you want your Cocoa app to be able
to use existing Carbon plug-ins.
Or maybe you're transitioning
from one environment to the other
and you want to use existing code
fragments in your application.
And that's what our
goal here is to enable.
It doesn't enable really
fine control within a window.
You can't have a Carbon button,
a Cocoa button, a Carbon toolbar,
a Cocoa drawer all talking to each other.
That's more fine control than
we're providing at this point.
But one thing that really surprised me.
I was working on these systems.
I was working on these slides,
like 1:00 AM a few weeks ago.
And I brought up the color
panel in PowerPoint on Jaguar,
and it was a Cocoa color panel.
And I just, I didn't even guess.
I knew that we had hooked up the thing,
but I didn't know that
PowerPoint was using the standard
Standard Color APIs in Carbon,
which is GetColor.
So what in fact has happened
is Carbon currently,
for its GetColor APIs,
uses the Cocoa Color panel.
And it uses it modally.
So the color panel had to
learn how to work modally.
In addition, the font panel,
Carbon also uses the
Cocoa font panel now.
And that one there's new APIs for,
because the existing Carbon font
APIs are all in terms of the menus.
So there's new APIs which,
once Carbon developers adopt,
they will be able to use the Cocoa font.
the Cocoa FOD panel.
To do this integration,
These two APIs,
which actually I think were there before,
but these two APIs now
have a lot more smarts.
You can create an NSWindow around a
CarbonWindow with initWithWindowRef.
WindowRef is the Carbon way
to refer to a window.
Once you do this,
you can now start treating that
CarbonWindow as if it was a CocoaWindow.
In addition,
you can return a CarbonWindow
from an existing CocoaWindow.
Obviously, in the first case,
if you provide the WindowRef,
that's what you'll get back.
But if you have some
arbitrary CocoaWindow,
you can call this,
and it will create a WindowRef
and return it to you.
And then you can start
making Carbon calls on that,
or you can pass it to Carbon subsystems.
And if you need to interact
with Carbon subsystems,
probably the thing you want to do is
start handling events via CarbonEvents
and learn about CarbonEvents.
To load Cocoa bundles in Carbon apps,
you would load the bundle with CFBundle.
One thing you need to assure
is if the Carbon app has not
linked against Cocoa at all,
you need to call NSApplicationLoad to
initialize the Cocoa application stack.
This can be called either from the
bundle or from the application.
Where it's called depends on
which one is the one who knows.
For instance,
if you're writing a Cocoa bundle
to work in a Carbon application,
and the Carbon application is an
unsuspecting application like Photoshop,
you probably put this call in your
bundle because you know you want to
work in the context of Carbon app.
Or vice versa,
maybe there's a Carbon app that
wants to use existing Cocoa bundles.
For instance, a Carbon app wants to
use Cocoa screensavers,
and the Carbon app would be
responsible for calling this function.
Quick note about NSPaceBoard.
This was a frequently requested feature.
There's now a new data type,
the vCard/Pboard type.
So if your app deals in vCards,
deals in people trade or whatever,
you can now use this as a standard way to
trade vCard information with other apps.
But more interestingly,
we have AddressBook.framework,
a brand new public framework which
has Objective-C Cocoa APIs to
get to that underlying people
information that Scott and
Steve were talking about yesterday.
So this is,
there are a bunch of AD classes
and a bunch of good APIs and
you can hear all about this in
the AddressBook framework talk.
Accessibility.
You saw demos of this yesterday.
This is to allow writing
assistive applications.
Assistive applications are these
Applications that run outside
of other applications,
but that either control those
applications or get more information
to them to communicate to the user.
The screen reader you saw
was an example of that.
Or alternate input devices,
devices that are way beyond the
simple keyboard and mouse interface,
ones that are really radically different.
These use the accessibility
features to provide users access
to all the other applications.
There are two sets of APIs here.
There are actually three.
The one API is the C APIs,
which the assistive
application creator uses.
The screen reader or the alternate
input device would use these C APIs.
Most of you probably won't be
writing assistive applications,
but it doesn't mark
the opportunity there.
These are the C APIs like this.
These C APIs in turn know how
to talk to Cocoa or Carbon.
There are Cocoa APIs,
which you are probably
more interested in.
for providing accessibility
features to these apps.
The way this works is UI elements
in Cocoa applications implement this
informal protocol called NSAccessibility
and they just have to implement a
few methods on their UI elements.
This API basically presents
the hierarchy of objects:
NSApplication, Windows,
Views inside them, Controls, etc.
as a hierarchy of these UI elements.
Note that built-in controls
in Cocoa implement this and in
fact many subclasses you guys
create will also just work.
But if you have some really wacky
subclasses or you create some
UI element totally from scratch,
you might want to look at this
accessibility protocol to see
what it takes to implement that.
Because just by implementing that your
app will be speakable and drivable
by these assistive applications.
There's a lot more details of
this in the Cocoa Controls and
Cocoa Accessibility on Thursday.
Scripting.
We've added a lot of nifty features to
scripting as well and a lot of bug fixes.
NSAppleScript is probably the
most interesting thing there.
It's a new class which
allows you to load,
compile,
and execute Apple scripts of any format.
It also even allows you to get back
pretty printed scripts in RTF so you
can display them in your application if
need be and let the user deal with them.
There's also automatic support
for properties property,
better conversions between
various data types,
and there's a whole talk for
Cocoa scripting where Mark will talk
about scripting in general and the
changes we've introduced in Jaguar.
So that's really all I have to say.
Now, one thing to note is that the Jaguar
release notes on your CD are current.
So they do include these
changes we've talked about.
They also include many more changes
we haven't talked about here.
Also note that not all the
changes we've talked about are
necessarily in the header files yet.
I mean, many are, but some aren't.
And also,
some of the things we talked about
might change further before Jaguar.
Because after all, we still have a few
months to ship Jaguar,
and we're still doing
engineering on this stuff.
So anyway, these two files,
apt-get.html and foundation.html,
have a lot of information.
I also want to point out one more thing
in regards to what's new in Cocoa.
As you know,
Apple is delivering Cocoa and here
we are telling you about all the
enhancements we're doing in Cocoa.
There's a lot of stuff.
But one additional thing to note
is that Apple is also delivering
applications that use Cocoa.
They're the old favorites:
Project Builder, Interface Builder,
you know and you love them, hopefully.
They're the recent favorites: iDVD2,
iPhoto, those are Cocoa applications.
And one thing you might not realize
is the apps Steve showed yesterday,
Address Book, Sherlock 3, and iChat,
those are all Cocoa applications as well.
And for all new applications,
Apple is always seriously considering
Cocoa as the way to deliver those
to you and to all the users.
Okay, whoop!
Documentation.
If you weren't at the
Cocoa intro talk yesterday,
one exciting documentation announcement
from Matt Rolofson was that the
AppKit and Foundation reference
will be available in printed
form in summer or late summer.
Anyway,
look for that in your ADC mailings.
I think that's very exciting for
those of us who still like to look
through books and papers and so on
and can't deal with too many windows
on our screen at the same time.
There's more information there,
the Learning Cocoa book and the new
building applications and the website,
clearly.
Here's a roadmap of the
various Cocoa talks.
The API techniques will go into some of
the not-so-subtle and subtle API issues,
design techniques, etc.
Scripting, controls, accessibility,
I already talked about those.
Drawing and text,
these are all overviews of
these Cocoa technologies,
touching upon some of the new things
that have also happened recently.
In addition, earlier you heard about
the new Cocoa tools.
Earlier you heard about
the Rendezvous stuff.
You can go to the CF Network talk
or Zero Configuration Networking
to hear more about how the
Rendezvous stuff is implemented.
Address Book Frameworks is on Friday.
That's the new address book APIs.
And there's the Cocoa feedback
session for those of you
who are here Friday at 5pm.
Hope to see you there.
And I'd like to invite Heather Hickman,
the Cocoa Technology Manager,
on stage to run the QA.
on stage to run the Q&A.